## Contents
1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Basics](#basics)       
    - [Running Discount](#running-discount)
    - [K-mer counting](#usage-k-mer-counting)
    - [Minimizer ordering evaluation](#usage-minimizer-ordering-evaluation)
    - [Tips](#tips)
3. [Advanced topics](#advanced-topics)
   - [Generating a universal hitting set](#generating-a-universal-hitting-set)
   - [Performance tuning for large datasets](#performance-tuning-for-large-datasets)
   - [Compiling Discount](#compiling-discount)
   - [Citation](#citation)
   - [Contributing](#contributing)
8. [References](#references)


## Overview

Discount is a Spark-based tool for k-mer counting, and for analysis of minimizer orderings. 
It is able to analyse large metagenomic-scale datasets while having a small memory footprint.

K-mer counting is the problem of identifying all unique sequences of length k in a genomic dataset, 
and counting how many times each one occurs. Discount is probably the most efficient k-mer counter for Spark/HDFS, 
but if your dataset is reasonably sized, traditional tools such as [KMC3](https://github.com/refresh-bio/KMC) can still 
be simpler and faster. If you have a very large dataset, or need to use a cluster/cloud, then Discount can outperform 
KMC3 for some tasks.

This software includes [Fastdoop](https://github.com/umbfer/fastdoop) by U.F. Petrillo et al [1].
We have also included compact universal hitting sets generated by [PASHA](https://github.com/ekimb/pasha) [2].
 
For a detailed background and description, please see 
[our paper on evenly distributed k-mer binning](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/advance-article/doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab156/6162158).

## Basics

[Compiling](#compiling-discount) is optional. If you prefer not to compile Discount yourself, 
you can download a pre-built release from the [Releases](https://github.com/jtnystrom/Discount/releases) page.

### Running Discount

Discount can run locally on your laptop, on a cluster, or in the cloud.
It has been tested standalone with Spark 3.1.0 and Spark 2.4.6 (minor version differences should be compatible).
In principle, Discount should run on any platform where Spark and Hadoop can run.
On Google Cloud, we have tested on Dataproc image version 2.0 (Debian 10, Spark 3.1).
On AWS, we have tested with emr-6.2.0 (Spark 3.0.1). 

To run locally, first, install and configure Spark (http://spark.apache.org).

Run/submit scripts for macOS and Linux are provided. To run locally, copy `spark-submit.sh.template` to a new file 
called `spark-submit.sh` and edit the necessary variables in the file (at a minimum, set the path to your Spark
installation). This will be the script used to run Discount.

To submit to a GCP cluster, you may use `submit-gcloud.sh.template`. In that case, change the example commands below to
use that script instead, and insert your GCloud cluster name as an additional first parameter when invoking. To run on 
AWS EMR, you may use `submit-aws.sh.template` instead.

### Usage (k-mer counting)

The following command produces a statistical summary of a dataset.
 
`
./spark-submit.sh --minimizers PASHA/pasha_all_55_10.txt -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq stats
`

To submit an equivalent job to Google Cloud Dataproc, after creating a cluster and uploading the necessary files 
(the AWS script has similar syntax):

`
./submit-gcloud.sh cluster-abcde --minimizers gs://my-data/PASHA/pasha_all_55_10.txt -k 55 -m 10 gs://my-data/path/to/data.fastq stats
`

The parameters used here are:

* `-k` - length of k-mers
* `-m` - width of minimizers (we recommend 10 in most cases)
* `--minimizers` - universal k-mer hitting set (see below), a text file containing m-mers, one per line
* `data.fastq` - the input data file (multiple files can be supplied, separated by space or by comma). 

The parameters `--minimizers` and `-m` have no effect on the final result of counting, but may impact performance.
The minimizer (universal hitting) set is used to split the input into bins and superkmers.
The above command uses the included PASHA minimizer set `pasha_all_55_10`, which is ideal for k=55, m=10. 
It can be used for any k >= 55. For 28 <= k < 55, `pasha_all_28_10` should be used instead. For other values of m and k, 
or to get optimal performance, you should obtain or generate your own PASHA set 
([see below](#generating-a-universal-hitting-set)).

All example commands shown here accept multiple input files. The FASTQ and FASTA formats are supported, 
and must be uncompressed.

To generate a full counts table with k-mer sequences (in many cases larger than the input data),
the `count` command may be used:

`
./spark-submit.sh --minimizers PASHA/pasha_all_55_10.txt -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --sequence
`

A new directory called `/path/to/output/dir_counts` (based on the location specified with `-o`) will be created for the 
output.

Usage of upper and lower bounds filtering, histogram generation, normalization of
 k-mer orientation, and other functions, may be seen in the online help:

`
./spark-submit.sh --help
`

### Usage (minimizer ordering evaluation)

Discount can also be used to evaluate the efficiency of various minimizer orderings
and minimizer sets, by outputting the k-mer bin distribution for a given dataset in detail. 
For example:

`
./spark-submit.sh --minimizers PASHA/pasha_all_55_10.txt -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --buckets
`

The `--buckets` flag enables this mode. Other parameters are the same as above. A new directory called 
`/path/to/output/dir_bucketStats` will be created for the output.
Each line in the output file will represent a single k-mer bin. The output files will contain six columns, which are:
Bin minimizer, number of superkmers, total number of k-mers, distinct k-mers, unique k-mers, maximum abundance for a 
single k-mer. See the file discount/bucket/BucketStats.scala for details.

The above example uses the universal frequency ordering, which is the one we recommend for efficient k-mer counting. 
The commands below can be used to enable other orderings. Please see our paper (linked above) for definitions of these 
orderings.

Universal set ordering (lexicographic), enabled by `-o lexicographic`

`
./spark-submit.sh --minimizers PASHA/pasha_all_55_10.txt -o lexicographic -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --buckets
`

Universal set ordering (random), enabled by `-o random`

`
./spark-submit.sh --minimizers PASHA/pasha_all_55_10.txt -o random -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --buckets
`

Minimizer signature, enabled by `-o signature`, no `--minimizers` needed

`
./spark-submit.sh -o signature -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --buckets
`

Random (all m-mers)

`
./spark-submit.sh -o random -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --buckets
`

The frequency-sampled (all m-mers) ordering is the default if no other flags are supplied:

`
./spark-submit.sh -k 55 -m 10 /path/to/data.fastq count -o /path/to/output/dir --buckets
`

### Tips
* If the input data contains reads longer than 1000 bp, you must use the `--maxlen` flag to specify the longest
expected single read length.

* Visiting http://localhost:4040 (if you run a standalone Spark cluster) in a browser will show progress details while 
  Discount is running.

* If you are setting up Spark for the first time, you may want to configure key settings such as logging verbosity,
spark driver and executor memory, and the local directories for shuffle data (may get large).
You can edit the files in e.g. spark-3.1.0-bin-hadoopX.X/conf/ to do this.
  If you are running a local standalone Spark (everything in one process) then it is helpful to increase driver memory 
  as much as possible.

* You can speed up the sampling stage somewhat by setting the `--numCPUs` argument.

* The number of files generated in the output tables will correspond to the number of partitions Spark uses, which you 
  can configure in the run scripts. However, we recommend configuring partitions for performance/memory usage and 
  manually joining the files later if you wish.

## Advanced topics 

### Generating a universal hitting set

Discount needs a compact universal hitting set (of m-mers) for optimal performance. Such sets determine what m-mers may 
become minimizers, which become bins. These sets are passed to Discount using the `--minimizers` argument.
They may be generated using the [PASHA](https://github.com/ekimb/pasha) tool.
Precomputed sets for many values of k and m may also be downloaded from the 
[PASHA website](http://pasha.csail.mit.edu/).
(Note that the PASHA authors use the symbols (k, L) instead of (m, k), which we use here. 
Their k corresponds to minimizer length, which we denote by m.)

A universal set generated for some pair of parameters (k, m) will also work for a larger k. However, the larger the gap, 
the greater the number of bins generated by Discount and the shorter the superkmers would be. This can negatively impact 
performance.

In either case, computed sets must be combined with their corresponding decycling set (available at the link above), 
for example as follows:

`
cat PASHA11_30.txt decyc11.txt > pasha_all_30_11.txt
`

This produces a set that is ready for use with Discount.

### Performance tuning for large datasets

The philosophy of Discount is to achieve performance through a large number of small and evenly sized bins, 
which are grouped into a large number of modestly sized Spark partitions. This reduces memory pressure as well as CPU 
time for many of the algorithms that need to run.
Assuming that one needs to count k-mers for a given value of k, and with fixed CPU and RAM resources, we have found 
three main ways to improve performance:

1. Increase m. For very large datasets, with e.g. more than 10<sup>11</sup> total k-mers, m=11 (or more) may be helpful.
   This would generate a larger number of bins (which would be smaller) by using a larger universal hitting set.
   However, if m is too large relative to the dataset, then a slowdown may be expected.
2. Increase the number of partitions (processing stage). This can be done in the run scripts. However, if the number is 
   too large, shuffling will be slower, sometimes dramatically so.
3. Increase the number of input splits by reducing the maximum split size. This affects the number of tasks in the 
   hashing stage.
The same caveat as above applies.

### Compiling Discount

To compile the software, the SBT build tool (https://www.scala-sbt.org/) is needed.
Although JDK 11 can be used, for maximum compatibility, we recommend compiling on JDK 8.
Discount is by default compiled for Scala 2.12/Spark 3.1.
(You can use Scala 2.11/Spark 2.4.x by editing build.sbt and the various run scripts according to the comments in those 
files. Note that generally, Spark 3.x is only compatible with Scala 2.12, and Spark 2.4.x is only compatible with 
Scala 2.11.)

The command `sbt assembly` will compile the software and produce the necessary jar file in
target/scala-2.12/Discount-assembly-x.x.x.jar. This will be a "fat" jar that also contains some necessary dependencies.
You do not need to install Scala manually, as sbt will handle this for you.

### Citation

If you find Discount useful in your research, please cite our paper:

Johan Nyström-Persson, Gabriel Keeble-Gagnère, Niamat Zawad, Compact and evenly distributed k-mer binning for genomic 
sequences, Bioinformatics, 2021;, btab156, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab156

### Contributing

Contributions are very welcome, for example in the form of bug reports,
pull requests, or general suggestions.

### References

1. Petrillo, U. F., Roscigno, G., Cattaneo, G., & Giancarlo, R. (2017). FASTdoop: A versatile and efficient library for 
   the input of FASTA and FASTQ files for MapReduce Hadoop bioinformatics applications. Bioinformatics, 33(10), 
   1575–1577.
2. Ekim, B.et al.(2020).  A Randomized Parallel Algorithm for Efficiently Finding Near-Optimal Universal Hitting Sets.  
   In R. Schwartz,  editor, Research  in  Computational  Molecular  Biology,  pages  37–53,  Cham.Springer International 
   Publishing 

